# Operating Systems and Networks

Lecture - 3
07 - 08 - 2023

## System Calls fro Process (Unix)

fork() - Creates a new child process
exec() - Makes a process execute (runs an executable)
wait() - Causes a parent to block until child terminates
exit() - Terminates a process

* Many variants of the above calls exist
* **init** process is the ancestor of all process

Why create a child process?
-> Parallelism
Distribution of tasks
Parent process requires the completion of child processes
init() process starts everything, but do you want it to do EVERYTHING?
Every process has its own responsibility

Why do we need to know the id?
- > To distinguish between child and parent
- > Parent needs to know when the child process finishes executing

Why do we need both fork() and exec()?
- > I can use fork() to create a new child process and exec() to execute that child process

# Process Virtualization - Mechanisms

## The Big Question - How to run multiple processes?

### Two Major Problems to be Solved

Process Virtualization Challenges:
1. How to ensure process does not do something not expected?
2. How to stop prcess in between and switch to another one?

**What if we allow the process to do whatever it wants?**
- > It can override the OS/critical aspects of the OS

## How can multiple processes run?

- Hardware support
  - Have some low level mechanism to switch process
  - What are the challenges?
    - Performance Overhead?
- Software support
  - Have some policies which decides what needs to be executed
  - What are some of the challenges?
    - Control Overhead?

## Normal Function Call

- Function call translates to a jump instruction
  - One instruction to another instruction
- A new stack stack frame is pushed to the stack, Stack pointer is updated
- Old value of program counter (return value) pushed to stack and PC is updated
- Stack frame containes return cale, function arguments, etc.

