# Operating Systems and Networks

Lecture Date - 31/07/2023
Prof - Karthik Vaidhyanathan

## Introduction and Course Overview

Popular OSes - 
* Linux
* ChromeOS
* Windows
* OSX

### **What is an OS?**

Courtesy of ChatGPT - ```An operating system(OS) is a type of system software that manages computer hardware/software resources and provides various services for programs. It essentially acts as an intermediary between users and computer hardware.```

### What is there were no OS?

* Application is a program: Processor will Fetch -> Decode -> Execute, Continue
* CPU will have the PC which points to the instructions in the memory

Application -> Hardware

In the absence of an OS, the appilcation would have to directly interact with the hardware of the computer

TO READ : Before OSs, Punchcards - 1956 - 2011
TO WATCH : Pirates of the Silicon Valley

### Overview

* OS basically is a middleware between the hardware and the appilcation/use program
* In charge of making sure that the system operates correctly and efficiently
* Does three key things:
  * Easy to execute programs
  * Manages memory
  * Handles the different I/O devices

Application -> Operating System -> Hardware

### Abstraction holds the key

**Lets draw ome parallels**

* One of the key principles in system design - Try to keep things simple
* Abstraction and deocmposition - Two main principles in Software Engineering
* Think of libraries in programming languages
  * Provides abstraction in terms of functions
  * All you need to know is functions to be called - Not how they work!
**OS can also be thought of as a black box**

### What does an OS abstract?

**Think about the messaging system that needs to be developed**

* The messaging application runs the CPU
* It requires RAM to run but it feels that it has ... TBC

### The 3 Pillars of Operating Systems

* Virtualization:
  1. OS gives every process a feeling that it has own CPU
  2. Every process feels that its enough memory
* Concurrency:
  1. Multiple processes can run at the same time without resulting in problems. eg: Multiple classes running concurrently in the college in different classrooms. Scheduling is imp. here.
  2. OS Provides mechanisms to make them work together
* Persistance:
  1. Disk is an I/O device. It needs to be managed and handled. eg: SSD, where the things are stored always and are retrievable
  2. OS handles interactions with the disk and performs storage management

These are the 3 things that any OS HAS TO DO for you out-of-the-box.

### Process Virtualization

* How many CPU does your computer have? 1 CPU, 12 cores (might vary, check htop)
* Is the number of processes equal to the number of CPU your computer has? No, number of processes might be in the hundereds or even thousands but at any one given point of CPU cycle, the processes that can be run in parallel is dependent on CPU cores

### Memory Virtualization

* Every process requires memory to run
* How many processes are active in your system?
* What's the total memory they require?
* How's CPU managing this?

### Concurrency

* OS has to juggle between multiple porcesses
* Heard of multi-threaded programs? What exactly are threads? eg: Lets say the master process is MS word, then spell-check can be a thread

### Persistence

* RAM is volatile
* Hardware and software are needed to store data persistently
  * Hardware: I/O .... TBC

### "Operating System" - Dual Roles

**Resource Management and Hardware Abstraction**

### Key Design Goals of OS 

* Abstraction: Convenience and easy to use
* High Performance: Minimize overhead, virtualisation should be done but minimise overhead
* Reliability: OS must continuously run without crashing
* Other Attributes
* Remember: OS itself is a massively complex software (Software relies on OS to function correctly!)

### But how do multiple systems interact?

### Computer Networks: The horizontal

* How can application from device 1 and device 2 communicate?
* How to ensure the data/information reaches realiably?
* What is multiple applications are running and communicating?
* **What is the role of OS is all this???**

### Networks - Different Components

* Different types of network - PAN, MAN, LAN, WAN
* Some terminologies - subnets, hosts, router, switches, transmission lines, interconnected netwroks (internet) not Internet
* **internet** - formed when distinct networks are interconnected (network of networks)
* Subnets - collection of communication lines and router owned by network operators
* Protocol - Agreement b/w communicating parties ... TBC

### The different pieces of Networks

* As more and more networks started joining ARPANET, the need for common protocol arises 
  * Invention of TCP/IP model
* Implementing TCP/IP on different platforms was encouraged
  * Socket - 4.2BSD Release of Berkeley Unix
  * Using networks with sockets proved effective and efficient
* As scale increased,... TBC

## Course Outline

* Getting the base right
* Building concurrent processes that can communicate
* Building a network file system

This Course:
* Process and Memory Virtualization -> Networking intro
* Concurrency -> Addressing and Routing
* Persistance -> ...


