# Operating Systems and Networks

Lecture Date: 03-08-2023
Prof Karthik Vaidhyanathan

## Virtualization of Processes and Memory

### What is a Process?
* A program is nothing but code
* Processes are **running program**
* There can be more than one process running ... TBC

### Process Virtualization
* Each process feels that it has its own CPU
* Even in Single core machines - There can be multiple process that run at the same time
* How is CPU handling this?
  With limited CPU can we create an illusion that Endless CPU's are available?
    OS achieves this using Virtualization of the CPU

**Q:** Can you think of how this is achieved?
- Do different processes get broken down into multiple steps and then jumbles and completed?
- What is the intuitive way of achieving this?

### Some prereqs:
CPU -> Memory -> Video Controller -> Keyboard Controller -> USB Controller -> HDD Controller
*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*
|                                  Common Serial Bus                                       |
*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*

As we go away from CPU, the more time it takes.

### Prereqs - Comp. Hardware

* CPU contains some registers
  * Temp Registers
  * Program Counter (PC), Stack Pointer (SP), Data register, address register
* Some key registers
  * PC - Points to the next instruction
  * SP - Points to the top of the stack in the memory
  * Program Status word - Status of current state of CPU and program (condition bits)

### How does CPU execute a program?
* Three stage pipeline
     Fetch -> Decode -> Execute
**Q:** Do you believe that the current hardware structure is similar to this?

### How to make it at software level?

* We do need support from the hardware
  * Some mechanisms to switch
  * Eg: Each process run for a particular time and then we switch =
  * Low-level mechanism (Context Switch)
* We also need some intelligence in the software
  * Some algorithms that can intelligently decide
  * Policies for switching
* Basically, we need - **low-level mechanisms** and **policies** (CPU schedule)

## What Constitutes a Process?

**Lets make it clear - Process is nothing but running program!!**

* Tha Characteristics that make up a process (State)
  * What parts of the machine are important for execution?
* ...TBC

We need:
1. Memory - address space (Memory that the process can address)
2. Instruction pointer or program counter
3. Stack pointer - local variables, functions and return addresses
4. Persistent process - I/O information

**Memory image of process**

Code -> Data -> Stack -> Heap

- Unique Identifier (Process ID)
- Memory Image
  - Code and data(static)
  - Stack and Heap (Dynamic)
- CPU Context: Registers
  - Program Counter
  - Current Operands
  - ...TBC

## Creation of a Process by OS:

- Load program into memory
  - Initially program resides on the disk
  - OS does **lazy loading**
- Allocate runtime stack
  - Use for local variables
  - Function parameters and return
- Start the program

- Creation of Program heap
  - Used for dynamically allocated data
  - malloc() and free()
- Basic file setup
  -  STDIN, ERR, ...TBC
- Initialise CPU registers
  - PC to the first instruction
- Start the program

## States of the Process

- At any point process can be in one of the following states
  - Running - Its running on the processor
  - Ready - Ready to run
  - Blocked - Not ready to run, something else is running
    - Why can a process be blocked?
      - > It can be interrupting another process
      - > It can be waiting for input
      - > It can be doing something sus
  - Think of I/O call (HUH?)
